---
{"dg-publish":true,"permalink":"/college/sem-iv/evs/gcs-case-study/gcs-soil-impact/"}
---

### Soil Impact

The fate of cyanides in soil is predicted to be dependent on factors such as cyanide concentrations, pH, temperature, metal content, concentration of microbes, and availability of nutrients. Cyanide may occur as hydrogen cyanide, alkali metal salts, or immobile metallocyanide complexes. In soil, cyanide present at low concentrations would biodegrade under aerobic conditions with the initial formation of ammonia, which would be converted to nitrite and nitrate in the presence of nitrifying bacteria. Under anaerobic conditions, the cyanides ion will denitrify to gaseous nitrogen. However, the upper limits for uninhibited aerobic and anaerobic biodegradation of cyanide in soil have not been confirmed in other studies. 
The fate of cyanogen and cyanogen chloride in soil or sediment is not well understood, but they are highly volatile gases and are not expected to persist in soils, and biotic or abiotic degradation is not expected to be significant fate processes compared to volatilization. The fate of thiocyanate in soil is largely uncharacterized, but there is evidence to suggest that it is not persistent in soils, and it can undergo both aerobic and anaerobic microbial degradation, but the degradation pathway has not been defined. Limited information is available on concentrations of cyanides in soil or sediments at hazardous waste sites, and no information could be found for cyanogen or cyanogen chloride.