---
{"dg-publish":true,"permalink":"/college/sem-iv/content/gcs-human-impact/"}
---


### Diseases in Tarkwa: A Rising Trend Linked to Mining Activities

Part of the major adverse environmental impact of mining is the generation of diseases due to pollutants and accidents at mines. The effects of some of these pollutants manifest themselves immediately (cyanide, for example) but others (such as mercury) take a long time to show. In Tarkwa, the extraction and processing of gold has given rise to various environmental related diseases and accidents. According to the District Medical Officer of Health Dr. Avorti, the common, mining-related diseases observed in the area over the years include, but are not limited to: 

i) Vector-borne diseases such as malaria, schistomiasis and onchocerciasis. 
b) Respiratory tract diseases, especially pulmonary tuberculosis and silicosis.
c) Skin diseases. d) Eye diseases, especially acute conjunctivitis. 
e) Accidents resulting from galamsey activities, and 
f) Mental cases.

Data obtained from the District Medical Office, Tarkwa, suggest that mining impactrelated diseases such as malaria, diarrhea, upper respiratory diseases, skin diseases, acute conjunctivitis and accidents form the top ten diseases in the area.

Respiratory Diseases There is an increasing trend for respiratory diseases in the area. The incidence of upper respiratory tract infections (URTI) is relatively high in the area, with an annual average of 840 reported cases. Pneumonia and pulmonary tuberculosis follow, with annual reported cases of 199 and 109 respectively.

#### Table 6.7: Annual Reported Cases of Respiratory Diseases at Tarkwa Government Hospital, 1992-98

| Year | UPPER RESPIRATORY TRACT INFECTIONS (URTI) | PNEUMONIA | TUBERCULOSIS (TB) | TOTAL |
| ---- | ----------------------------------------- | --------- | ----------------- | ----- |
| 1992 | 356                                       | 101       | 83                | 540   |
| 1993 | 594                                       | 78        | 76                | 748   |
| 1994 | 1227                                      | 35        | 72                | 1334  |
| 1995 | 692                                       | 27        | 73                | 792   |
| 1996 | 881                                       | 93        | 111               | 1085  |
| 1997 | 1244                                      | 145       | 146               | 1535  |
| 1998 | 924                                       | 724       | 151               | 1799  |
Source: Tarkwa Government Hospital

The table shows that with the exception of the decline in1995, reported cases of the three major respiratory diseases has been on the increase from 1992 to 1998. 

According to the District Medical Officer of Health, TB has a strong history in the area. The rock formation in which gold is found in the Tarkwa area has very high silica content. Therefore, the dust generated by mining activities contains silica, which causes the silicosis, tuberculosis and silico-tuberculosis diseases. The miners and residents who inhale this dust are thus exposed to these diseases. This explains why there is a high level of silico-tuberculosis among miners in the area. A 1989 study of one mine in the area recorded a 1.2/1000 incidence of silico-tuberculosis while the incidence of pure silicosis was 1.9/1000. The average incidence of tuberculosis in the District is 0.5/1000 against the national average of 0.003/1000. 

Again data from the District Medical Office, Tarkwa, showed a considerable increase in reported cases of acute conjunctivitis. The data indicated the incidence of conjunctivitis as 2.4/1000 in 1995 and this is blamed on the high incidence of particulate matter in the area. The communities complain of high dust content and accused the mining companies of inadequate dust-suppressing measures. The 1996 monitoring report of TGL described dust-suppressing measures by the company as ineffective, which confirms the concerns of the communities on dust pollution.

#### Malaria:
Malaria is a major public health problem in Tarkwa. A report by the District Medical Officer revealed that the Wassa West District has the highest incidence of malaria in the Western Region. Malaria is the primary cause of child mortality in the country and the Wassa West District is the worst affected area with an infant mortality rate as high as 85/1000 compared with the national average of 80/1000. The District also records the highest incidence of malaria in the country with an annual incidence of about 185/1000 against the national average of about 40/1000. In 1994, for example, 75% of miners surveyed at the mines were carrying the malaria parasite. Between 400 and 500 shift losses were recorded in the peak of the rainy season.

Most of the communities contacted complained that the concentration of mining operations is responsible for the high incidence of malaria in the area. The mining activities in the area promote environmental modifications that favour malaria vector development. The activities create open pits, divert watercourses and subsequently result in bodies of stagnant water that have been instrumental in furthering the spread of malarial vectors, notably the anopheles mosquito egg development.

The concentration of mining companies in Tarkwa has gathered a large army of migrant workers, some of who may have been carrying the parasite before their arrival in Tarkwa. Not only do such people suffer themselves, but they also increase the risk of malarial epidemics.

#### Skin Diseases:
Cases of skin diseases were observed to be prevalent in communities that were contacted. The worst affected areas include communities along the Bonsa River and its tributaries within the concession of TGL and GAG, particularly Mile 8, a community relocated by GAG. At Mile 8, skin rashes were very common among the population and children were hard hit by this condition. The community alleged that the rash was an allergic reaction affecting users of one of the hand-dug wells provided by GAG, which they claim is highly polluted. 

This is believed to be the result of cyanide and mercury pollution from gold processing. Mercury in particular is widely used by small-scale miners in the area for the processing of gold. It is proved that mercury can cause skin cancer. 

All the communities contacted blamed the high incidence of skin rashes on the activities of the mining companies, particularly TGL and GAG. They alleged that occasional increases in levels of cyanide reaching downstream from mine-run-off and leakage from cyanide ponds within the two mines upstream pollute the water of the stream that they use for bathing and drinking. 

There were also documented reports that confirmed abnormal mercury levels in hairs taken from some small-scale miners and their families.

#### Other Diseases:
Other mining and environment related diseases are reported to be on the increase in the area. These include diarrhea and sexually transmitted diseases (STDs). 

Reported cases of environment-related diarrhea are on the increase. In 1998, the monthly diarrhea incidence of 3.4/1000 in the District rose to 6.6/1000 in July, which is the peak of the rainy season, but fell to 4.8/1000 after the rains. This scenario suggests that surface water run-off could have been responsible for the wide spread of various, mining-related toxicants in the area resulting in the high incidence during the rainy season. Also, even though the incidence fell after the rains, it was still higher than the district monthly incidence of 3.4/1000. 

Sexually transmitted diseases (STD) have also assumed an increasing trend in the Wassa West District. Reported cases of syphilis and HIV have been on the increase in the area since 1992. For instance, reported cases of HIV rose from six in 1992 to 100 in 1996. 

Two main factors are responsible for the increasing incidence of STDs. The first is attributed to the high influx of people into the area of expatriate employees and of Ghanaians looking for jobs and trade outlets.

The second factor is blamed on the concentration of galamsey operators in the area. According to the District Medical Officer of Health, Tarkwa, the screening of one galamsey community produced 10 cases of syphilis and one case of HIV.

