---
{"dg-publish":true,"permalink":"/college/sem-iv/content/gcs-water-impact/"}
---

Cyanide compounds are found in various forms such as hydrogen cyanide, cyanide ion, and metal cyanides, and their environmental fate varies widely. The main chemical processes that cause loss of simple cyanides in aquatic media are oxidation, hydrolysis, and photolysis. Oxidation can convert certain cyanides into isocyanates, which can then be hydrolyzed to ammonia and carbon dioxide. However, the significance of this process in natural waters is not yet known. This process may be affected by different factors such as the presence of strong oxidizing agents, the pH level and temperature of the water, and the concentration of other elements and compounds in the water.

Hydrogen cyanide and cyanide ion exist in equilibrium with their relative concentrations depending on pH and temperature. At pH levels below 8, over 93% of the free cyanide in water will exist as undissociated hydrogen cyanide. The chemical hydrolysis of hydrogen cyanide can form formamide, which is subsequently hydrolyzed to ammonium and formate ions. However, the relatively slow rates of hydrolysis reported for hydrogen cyanide in acidic solution and of cyanides under alkaline conditions indicate that hydrolysis is not competitive with volatilization and biodegradation for removing free cyanide from ambient waters. This means that other processes such as volatilization and biodegradation may be more effective in removing free cyanide from water, especially in natural environments.

Alkali metal cyanides are very soluble in water and will readily dissociate into their respective anions and cations when released into water. Depending on the pH of the water, the resulting cyanide ion may then form hydrogen cyanide or react with various metals in natural water. The proportion of hydrogen cyanide formed from soluble cyanides increases as the water pH decreases. At pH levels below 7, over 99% of the cyanide ions in water are converted to hydrogen cyanide. As the pH increases, cyanide ions in the water may form complex metallocyanides in the presence of excess cyanides, however, if metals are prevalent, simple metal cyanides are formed. Unlike water-soluble alkali metal cyanides, insoluble metal cyanides are not expected to degrade to hydrogen cyanide. They may react with other metals or compounds present in the water and form complex compounds, but they are not expected to degrade over time.

The significance of photolysis in the fate of cyanides in water has not been fully investigated, but it may not be significant in natural waters because of light reduction at increasingly greater depths. Light intensity decreases as the water depth increases, which means that the process of photolysis becomes less effective as the water depth increases. However, in clear water or at water surfaces, some metallocyanides, such as ferrocyanides and ferricyanides, may decompose to the cyanide ion by photodissociation and subsequently form hydrogen cyanide. For example, diurnal changes in free cyanide concentrations in the drainage from spent precious metal ore heaps were found to maximize around mid-day due to the photodissociation of iron and cobalt cyanocomplexes.

Biodegradation is an important transformation process for cyanide in natural surface waters, but additional data is needed to understand the factors that affect this process. The rate of biodegradation of cyanide compounds may be affected by different factors such as the cyanide concentrations, pH, temperature, availability of nutrients, and acclimation of microbes. Understanding these factors will help us predict the fate of cyanide compounds in natural environments and develop effective strategies for managing and mitigating their impacts.